The Project Gutenberg eBook of The farm and the woodlot, by J. E.
Barton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The farm and the woodlot

Author: J. E. Barton

Release Date: January 29, 2023 [eBook #69895]

Language: English

Produced by: Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FARM AND THE
WOODLOT ***





[Illustration: Black locust grove in pasture on poor soil. Seed sown
in plowed land, in rows four feet apart. Nine years ago cultivated one
year, and since thinned twice. 197 trees on one-half acre will make 514
posts (7′-3″). Photo by U. S. Forest Service.]




                       The Farm and the Woodlot

                           By J. E. BARTON,
                      State Forester of Kentucky.

           Published by the direction of the State Board of
                               Forestry.

                      GOVERNOR JAMES B. MCCREARY,
                               Chairman.

                            JOHN W. NEWMAN,
                     Commissioner of Agriculture.

                           JOSEPH H. KASTLE,
                Director, Kentucky Experiment Station.

                        HON. JOHNSON N. CAMDEN,
                              Versailles.

                          HON. W. H. MACKOY,
                              Covington.

                           MRS. MASON MAURY,
                              Louisville.




                       THE FARM AND THE WOODLOT


                             INTRODUCTION.

Undoubtedly, one of the most important phases of the forestry work,
so far as the individual States are concerned, is the question of the
woodlot and its improvement. In the Eastern States――that is, those east
of the Mississippi River――a very considerable portion of the forested
areas within each State is in the form of woodlots which are a part
of and an adjunct to the farm so that in any comprehensive forest
policy for the Eastern United States a great deal of attention must be
focused upon this phase of the work. This is, undoubtedly, true so far
as Kentucky is concerned where, as a whole, the land is held in fee
simple by the citizens of the State as farms from a few acres in size
up to several thousand acres. By the majority of the owners of these
farms, the value and importance of the woodlot is little understood
nor has the practice of forestry as it applies to these woodlots any
significance whatsoever. The object of this bulletin is to make clear
just what forestry is, the relation of scientific forestry to the
improvement of the woodlot and the economical part which the farm
woodlot plays in the industrial and social welfare of the State. As a
matter of fact, this is one of the most difficult features of the work
to present properly, because it is a hard matter to make clear to the
average individual just why a woodlot is an asset in connection with
his property and how the improvement and care of his woodlot concerns
him closely and means a proportional increase directly in the actual
money value of the material on hand and indirectly in ways which do not
present themselves readily unless the attention is focused on them――as
for example, the value of a woodlot as a wind-break in connection with
an orchard or in connection with the farm as a whole, or the value of
a wooded area on an easily eroded hillside as a fixative for the soil
and a preventative against the deterioration of the cultivated areas
below it. The effort then of this bulletin will be――first, to show
how the average woodlot may be brought to a standard of productivity
compatible with the complete utilization of the ground, and second, to
show in detail what the direct and indirect benefits of a woodlot in
connection with any farm will be under the best circumstances. In the
preparation of this bulletin, free use has been made of all bulletins
and publications on this subject, which the writer has been able to get
hold of and acknowledgment is made to these as a whole, since it would
be impracticable to make complete individual acknowledgement.


                           WHAT IS FORESTRY?

To the average individual, forestry as a science does not mean
very much. The impression is that it has to do with the trees, but
to what extent and how it deals with this question is by no means
thoroughly understood. In the first place, forestry deals with trees
as a community and not as an individual――that is, it deals with them
in the bulk and in this respect differs from kindred sciences where
the individual tree is a matter of concern. The forester is often
called upon to answer questions and discuss matters with relation to
shade trees or ornamental trees, but this is not a matter within his
province properly, but is a matter for the landscape architect or
horticulturist. Forestry primarily concerns itself with the planting
and growing of trees for sale at a profit. Occasionally forestry may
concern itself with the growing and raising of trees for purposes
where the money value of the crop, while it may not be as evident as
where the trees are placed on the market and sold, is nevertheless, a
real money consideration. This is the case, where certain areas are
planted for the purification and conservation of a city water supply.
Here the actual worth of the forest is the value to the people of the
city or community of pure drinking water. This will be the case in
the Catskill Mountains where enormous expenditures are being made for
supplying New York City with pure water and where the purity of this
water supply depends upon the maintenance of certain areas in forest
growth. Forestry then, so far as it relates to the farm and woodlot,
may be defined as dealing with trees as communities and the growing and
marketing of these trees for a profit. It is a simple proposition, the
same as raising corn. In raising corn, the ground is prepared, the seed
is planted at a certain time in the spring, the necessary attention is
given during the growing season and in the fall it is harvested and
sold. A certain price is obtained for the grain and a certain price for
the stalks, usually in the form of fodder for stock. The chief value
of the corn crop depends upon the number of bushels per acre of corn
(grain) that have been produced and the kind and quality of corn there
is to market. The kind and quality of the corn crop depends on the
selection of seed. All this is accomplished within a year’s time――the
planting, the harvesting, the cultivation and the sale of the product.
Forestry is exactly the same proposition. The stock is selected, the
trees are planted, the necessary attention is given them during the
growing period, and eventually the crop is harvested and marketed for
the best price obtainable. The value of the timber crop depends on
how much material you raise to the acre, the kind and quality of the
product you have to market and the demand in the market for the class
of material to which the timber crop is particularly adapted. The chief
difference is this: that, whereas, the corn crop has been planted,
harvested and marketed within one growing season, a forest crop takes
a period of growing seasons before it is ready to market. The precise
length of this period depends on the kind of material you are to raise,
as fence posts, ties, lumber, etc.


                      IMPROVEMENT OF THE WOODLOT.

What then can be done to show the man most concerned, the farmer, the
importance of the improvement of his woodlot? First, an attempt will be
made to set forth the matter as clearly as possible in print, which is
the object of this bulletin; and the necessary steps will then be taken
to furnish an ocular demonstration of the facts herein set forth by
the establishment of nurseries and the maintenance of model woodlots.
On the big majority of farms in Kentucky, there are certain areas which
are not good farm land and never will be for a variety of reasons
(inferior soil, rocky soil, too steep a slope, etc.); but these lands
in most cases can produce timber crops and should be producing them,
since they are a commercial adjunct to the farm and bring in a revenue.
As Mr. W. F. Cook, of Hickman County, says, “It is a great deal more
valuable than giving the land over to weeds and wild briars.”

Ordinarily, there is little or no attention paid to the woodlot on a
farm, and without attention a woodlot is in much the same condition
as a corn field in which no attention was paid to the kind of corn
planted, and which was not cultivated during the growing season. You
commonly find in a woodlot a great variety of trees, some of a valuable
species and some of more or less worthless species. You also find
crooked and defective and diseased trees, and further you ordinarily do
not find in any particular woodlot one-half the trees that the ground
will support, which is about the worst feature of all, since here is an
economic waste.


                       PURPOSES OF THE WOODLOT.

When the improvement of the woodlot is seriously under consideration,
one of the first propositions is to determine just what purpose the
woodlot will serve in the economy of the farm. Ordinarily a woodlot
will be maintained for the following reasons: 1. To furnish fence
posts; 2. To furnish fuel; 3. As a shelter belt for certain areas
or for the whole farm; 4. As a protection on steep up-lands against
erosion; 5. As a means of regeneration of worn out land; 6. As an
investment pure and simple, without regard to immediate returns; 7.
For the aesthetic value. Any combination of these reasons may prevail
for the maintenance of a woodlot; however, each one of them will be
discussed in its turn as separate propositions.

1. Probably one of the chief reasons for maintaining the woodlot on
farms in Kentucky from the purely utilitarian standpoint will be to
obtain fence posts. These are a commodity on the farm which cannot be
dispensed with and for which the demand is staple. Concrete may and
will at some future date, supersede wood as fence posts, especially
in rich easily accessible agricultural regions where farming is very
profitable and conducted as a business, but it will do this only
slowly in remote regions, and at the present time concrete posts are
not extensively used in any locality. A woodlot can then be reasonably
maintained for the production of fence posts. Ordinarily the posts
are largely consumed on the home farm, since they are more valuable
to the producer at this point than if he should sell them; however,
if there is a surplus, a market for this will not be lacking and the
price obtained will more than justify the cost of the establishment of
the woodlot and its maintenance up to the time of harvesting the crop.
In considering the species which lend themselves most readily to the
production of this class of products in Kentucky, undoubtedly, black
locust (Robinia pseudacacia) sometimes locally called yellow locust,
lends itself most readily to this purpose. It is indigenous to the
State, grows fairly rapidly and lasts a long time in contact with the
soil, three prime requisites of any species which is to be used in the
growing of this class of material. Other species which may be used are
catalpa (Catalpa speciosa), walnut, osage orange, chestnut and juniper
(also known locally as cedar or red cedar).

2. As a general proposition, it appears that the maintenance of a
woodlot for the growing of fuel, so far as Kentucky is concerned,
is not an important consideration. So far as my observation goes
throughout the State――even in the rural districts――coal is the general
fuel in use on account of the abundance of supply and is in a large
number of ways cheaper and preferable to wood as a fuel. On this
account the woodlot will supply only a very small amount of fuel and
consideration of this matter is not important. If it does happen that a
supply of fuel wood is desirable or necessary on the farm, undoubtedly,
hickory and oak lend themselves most readily for this purpose. Any
species of hickory grows fairly rapidly, and certain species of oak, as
for instance red oak, makes a reasonably rapid growth. A woodlot for
this purpose would be managed as a sprout forest.

3. The removal of forests and wooded areas of Kentucky has undoubtedly
resulted in certain climatic changes. These are principally to be
noticed in the prevalence of high winds which formerly did not exist,
and such winds have a marked effect on certain farm activities, as for
instance the handling of an orchard or the handling of stock. A shelter
belt, therefore, offers protection to the farm house and surrounding
buildings. To be of use, the shelter belt or wind break must be in the
direction of the prevailing winds. Further, since in all probability
a shelter belt is of most use and is most desirable in the winter
time, the component species in the shelter belt should be, to a large
extent, evergreens, so that the effectiveness may be as great in winter
as in summer. In connection with an orchard, a shelter belt or wind
break, undoubtedly, protects against cold and destructive currents of
air which injure the orchard in various ways either by injuring the
blossoms of the fruit, or at a later period, by injuring the fruit,
which is blown from the trees by the wind and left in bad condition for
shipping.

The species then which should compose a shelter belt should, as far as
possible, have these characteristics. They should grow fast to furnish
the maximum amount of protection in the shortest space of time, and
should have as wide a usefulness as possible. So far as the majority
of instances are concerned, the shelter belt might have two objects.
The production of useful material for the farm as fence posts as well
as a wind break. In this case, it would be well to plant black locust
in conjunction with some evergreens, as white pine or Norway spruce,
hemlock or yellow pine. The number of evergreens which may be utilized
for this purpose in Kentucky are limited, but the number of hardwoods
which lend themselves to this purpose is very great, as for instance,
the hickories, ashes, black locust, poplars, tulip poplar, osage orange
and others. Beech also makes a good tree for the composition of a
shelter belt.

[Illustration: Chestnut plantation, thirty years old. Photo by U. S.
Forest Service.]

4. As a protection on a steep up-lands against erosion, the chief thing
is to establish a forest cover. The composition of the stand is more or
less immaterial although it is always desirable that the most readily
marketable species shall be used so that the woodlands in addition to
performing their protective function may also supply an actual revenue.
Therefore, as far as possible, the trees to be used should be the
ashes, oak, chestnut, hickories, maples and other species, whose value
in the lumber market is standard. The chief feature in regard to this
protective woodland is that the forest cover shall remain unbroken.

5. As a means of regeneration of worn out land, especially hillsides,
which are liable to erosion and do not lend themselves easily to a
scientific rotation of crops, a forest cover is a very important factor
since it furnishes to the soil the essential humus and, when such
species as the black locust or honey locust are planted, it furnishes
the nitrogenous elements to the soil, since the locusts are legumes and
produce on their roots nodules of nitrifying organisms similar to those
found on the roots of alfalfa, cow-peas or soy beans.

6. As a general proposition, the raising of lumber or timber by an
individual is out of the question on account of the length of time
which it takes to grow the better grades of this material. Ordinarily,
a tree fifty years old will furnish only the poorest grades of lumber
and usually only small dimension stock. Generally speaking, one hundred
years is not too small a calculation for the length of rotation when
lumber is the aim. In the event that any individual plants trees for
the production of the lumber, such planting is done as an investment
purely and simply since he can not expect to see the crop harvested
within his life time. The only monetary benefit that could possibly
accrue to the owner is from the material which may have to be thinned
out or in the event that he should desire to sell his farm when the
existence of a grove or woodland of healthy young trees would represent
an actual money value to the purchaser. In case planting for this
reason is made, the trees should be those which are the most valuable
lumber producing species, as for instance, the oaks, the ashes,
hickory, sweet gum, tulip poplar, white and yellow pines, basswood and
a few others.

7. It may be that in connection with the farm the presence of a
grove of trees thereon will represent a value from the aesthetic and
science standpoint where the beauty of the landscape is a matter of
consideration to the owner of the land, or to any one who might desire
to purchase it. In this event the kind of tree is not so important as
the actual presence of trees of some kind. The general effect is the
main consideration, without regard to the individual features which
compose this effect.


                           FOREST TAXATION.

One of the most important factors in connection with the consideration
of woodlots is the matter of taxation, and this is a matter which
so far as Kentucky is concerned, has had little attention. In the
first place, there is no classification of land within the State for
taxation purposes. It is a generally accepted theory among experts in
this matter at the present time that there is only one fair method
of taxation which may be applied to land maintained by the owner in
forest growth and that is that there should be a tax placed on the land
which shall be an annual tax, and another tax placed on the forest
crop =when it is harvested=. In no other manner does it seem probable
that reforestation of suitable areas throughout the State may be
accomplished, since in the first place, on account of the character of
the investment the owner of the land must be assured before hand just
what his taxes on the land are to be, and in the second place the risks
attendant upon the raising of a forest crop, because of the long period
of years before it reaches maturity, make it essential that the crop of
forest products shall be taxed at maturity when it is harvested, rather
than that an annual tax shall be imposed. Certain States have already
gone a long ways in this direction and Pennsylvania has recently
passed three laws dealing with the matter of forest taxation and the
classification of forest land which embrace the best features of recent
thought on this subject. The essentials of the recent Pennsylvania laws
are as follows:

1. Classification of suitable land set aside by the owner for forest
purposes as auxiliary forest reserves.

2. Agreement with the State to maintain such land in forest growth and
penalties for failure to carry out agreement.

3. Assessment of land classified as auxiliary forest reserves at $1.00
per acre annual tax.

4. Payment by owner of 10 per cent of the value of the forest products
when harvested to the county to be distributed among the proper county
funds.

5. Fixed charge on auxiliary forest reserve land of two cents per acre
for schools and two cents per acre for roads.

Under these provisions it is obvious that the growing of timber on
suitable areas would be reduced to a practical business basis.

Providing the tax question is sufficiently settled and definite for a
period of years the regeneration of the woodlot or the establishment
of one may be undertaken as a safe investment. So far as Kentucky
is concerned, the present tax laws and the manner of handling the
assessments in the counties are not such as to bear heavily on timbered
or wooded areas. In the event that a new classification of land is made
and new tax laws enacted every effort should be made to bring about
such a classification of forest land and such a system of taxation as
will encourage the reforestation of suitable areas and the regeneration
of the present woodlands.


                     REGENERATION OF THE WOODLOT.

When the question of the regeneration of the woodlot is seriously
considered there are several points which stand out prominently as
follows:

    1. Protection.
    2. Taking of stock.
    3. Removal of undesirable species.
    4. Selection of desirable species.
    5. Method of regeneration.
    6. Care and management.

1. =Protection.= It is essential that a woodlot shall be protected if
it is to be an asset to the owner and brings him financial returns.
There are two destructive agencies against which he must make
special efforts, fire and stock. It may seem unnecessary to point
out the various bad effects which fire and stock have on woodlands,
but they are nevertheless here set forth in brief. =Fire= destroys
timber utterly, injures it so that it is subject to insect and fungi
attacks, lowers the grade of the timber, destroys or seriously injures
reproduction, destroys humus and lowers the productive capacity of the
soil. There is no way in which burning over a woodland improves the
character of the forest. =Stock= have a very injurious effect on trees,
especially young growth. Some stock eat up the nuts and berries and
seeds which are the means of reproducing the forest. Other stock browse
on the young trees which have started, destroying the young growth
altogether or seriously gnawing other trees thereby leaving them badly
malformed and depleted in vitality. By rubbing against small trees
stock also do a great deal of harm. So stock should be rigidly excluded
from the woodlot, or at least until all the trees are well developed
and even then no good is accomplished. If possible, the woodlot should
be well fenced. The other destructive agencies against which protection
may become necessary are insects and disease. If fire and stock are
excluded, the chances of insects and disease doing serious damage is
materially decreased. Diseases and insects are best kept in check by
keeping the wooded area clean of dead and decaying material. In case of
serious insect infestation it may in some cases pay to spray the trees,
but under ordinary conditions this is not practical. The common way of
fighting disease and insects is to cut down and burn all affected trees.

2. =Taking of Stock.= The next step in the regeneration of our woodland
is to find out the extent and character of the stock on hand, for we
can not proceed intelligently without this knowledge. This taking of
stock may be a purely ocular process or it may be a detailed estimate
and description, depending on the extent of the woodland and the
desires of the owner. All reproduction should be accounted for as
well as the older stock on hand. The taking of stock should also
involve the division of species into desirable and undesirable species,
by desirable species being meant such species as it is desired to
encourage because of the demand for it in the local market or because
of the use which may be made of it by the owner on his farm. The
desirable species will usually include the fast growing species.

3. =Removal of Undesirable Species and Trees.= The first actual work
in connection with the regeneration of the woodlot is the removal of
undesirable species. When this is undertaken the local market and other
markets should be carefully studied in order that, if possible, a sale
may be found for the material which is removed, so that the work may
pay for itself. In determining what are undesirable species there are
several factors which will govern and no specific list of trees can be
cited. The desire of the owner, the market for the material, rapidity
of growth and other features are among the important considerations.
Such trees as blue beach, horn beam, red bud, service berry and others
have no rightful place in a woodlot since they take up space without
furnishing any product of value, unless the wooded area is desired for
its aesthetic features. In a woodlot which is maintained for fence
posts and fuel it would be poor policy to retain any but those species
which make good fence post material and fuel and grow rapidly. In this
matter, common sense will go a long way. Also badly suppressed trees,
malformed and diseased or infected individuals should be removed as far
as practicable.

4. =Selection of Desirable Species.= In the selection of desirable
species there are a large number of considerations, and the first of
these is the purpose of the owner in maintaining the woodlot. For
instance, if the owner desires fence posts, and fencing material, his
woodlot will, in Kentucky, be confined to those species which produce
such material =quickly=, as for example black locust, catalpa, chestnut
and walnut, also it will be well to have a percentage of red cedar
(juniper) in the mixture, for since red cedar grows comparatively
slowly, it may be reserved to be cut as the second crop and will serve
to shade the ground and prevent erosion when the faster growing
species have been cut and during the restocking of the area. If fuel as
well as fence post material is desired, a mixture including hickory,
oak and chestnut would be desirable. If ties, posts, poles or other
products are an object, certain species are desirable and are easily
grown. A list of trees suitable for various purposes is herewith given.
No species are included in this list which will not produce marketable
material repeatedly within the lifetime of a single individual. Only
in unusual cases is the raising of trees for lumber recommended as a
feasible or profitable venture for the individual farm owner.

Fence posts and fencing material――Black locust, catalpa, chestnut,
walnut, oak, red cedar (juniper).

Fuel――Oak, hickory, maple, chestnut.

Poles――Chestnut, catalpa, red cedar.

Ties――Black locust, catalpa, chestnut, walnut, oak.

Vehicle material and handle stock――Hickory.

5. =Methods of Regeneration.= There are several things which must be
done to secure a good forest over the area. If natural seeding is to
be depended upon for reproduction, the ground must be prepared to
receive the seed. Sometimes the sod will be so thick over the area
that seeds get no chance to generate. In this case, the sod should
be plowed up, if possible, or harrowed so that the seeds may have a
suitable opportunity to start. To do well, it is necessary that the
seeds and seedlings have easy access to the mineral soil. It may
be that the ground is so shaded that seedlings do not receive the
necessary sunlight. If this be so, sufficiently large openings should
be made in the forest cover to admit the required light. It may be that
natural seeding does not proceed rapidly enough and that this must be
supplemented by the sowing of seed artificially. When artificial sowing
is resorted to it will be found that there are several methods of
sowing which recommend themselves: broadcast, sowing in prepared rows,
sowing in prepared seed spots and sowing with a corn planter either in
rows or spots. This last method is recommended as being usually most
satisfactory and economical. Sowing with a corn planter can be resorted
to only in the case of small seeds. Large seeds, such as walnuts,
hickory nuts, etc., must be planted by hand, but when this is done they
are liable to be eaten by squirrels or other rodents, in which case it
may be necessary to plant such seeds in small protected seed beds and
then transplant the seedlings to the place where they are desired.

If planting is to be depended upon for reforesting, the nursery stock
obtained should be small seedlings not over one or two years old or
transplants two to three years old. If the amount of planting to be
done is large, it may be wise to start seed beds close to the ground
where the planting is to be done and not to depend on commercial
nurseries for stock.

6. =Care and Management.= It will be found that the care and management
of the woodlot is relatively a simple matter after the forest is
well established and that the character of the stock and the amount
and quality of the products will improve materially with management.
There are certain systems of management which recommend themselves
for woodlots such as the (1) simple coppice (2) pole wood coppice (3)
coppice with standards or variations of these. The three methods here
cited are briefly described.

=Simple Coppice.= This is a system of management wherein all the stand
is cut and the restocking of the area is secured by sprouts from the
old stumps. Under this system the stand should be cut at an age not to
exceed twenty-five years and preferably about fifteen years, although
this is usually impossible from a commercial standpoint. The cutting
should be done in the late fall, winter or early spring. The stumps
should be cut low, smooth and slanting so as to shed water and prevent
decay. After a time under this system the sprouting capacity of the
stump is greatly reduced and arrangement must be made to secure new
individuals either by direct seeding or by planting.

=Pole Wood Coppice.= This system involves the leaving of certain trees
until they reach the pole wood stage and are suitable for such products
as ties, poles, etc. It is a favorite method of handling woodlots.

=Pole Wood Standards.= This system involves the leaving of a certain
few trees until they are of large size. Such trees should usually be
from the seed.

In the management of the woodland, it will be necessary to make several
cuttings before the final cutting at the end of the rotation, usually
one or two. A thinning may early become necessary to give the best
specimens a better chance for growth. Sometimes two thinnings may be
required. Often a thinning may be required to secure reproduction by
opening up the forest cover and exposing the ground so that young
growth may have the opportunity to get started.

In the final cutting, when all or the major part of the crop is cut,
the material should be removed from the ground as rapidly as possible
and the brush disposed of when practical. The disposal of brush will
usually take the form of lopping the limbs from the tops and scattering
them, so as to secure early decay of the waste material. Sometimes the
brush may be advantageously piled and burned.


                              CONCLUSION.

No attempt has been made in this bulletin to deal exhaustively with
the woodlot problem. The desire has been to point the way for the
improvement of the woodlots in Kentucky. Individual cases deserve
specific consideration, and only the main features of the proposition
have been touched upon. The State Forester will cheerfully answer by
mail all questions relating to this subject so far as it is possible to
do so, and will give such personal advice and direction as the time at
his disposal and the circumstances warrant. A list of books, bulletins
and articles treating this subject is appended for those who desire to
go more deeply into the matter than is possible in a publication of
this character. The illustrations are from photographs loaned by the
Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture.


Akerman, A. Practical protection and improvement of the farm woodlot,
illustrated. (Bailey, L. H. Cyclopedia of American Agriculture, 1907,
v. 2: 330–33.)

Akerman, Alfred. Spring work in the woodlot; planting white pine
seedlings. (New England Farmer, Montpelier, Vt., April 7, 1906, v. 85,
No. 14: 4.)

Akerman, Alfred. Spring work in the woodlot. (New England Farmer,
Montpelier, Vt., April 28, 1906, v. 85, No. 17: 6.)

Akerman, Alfred. Winter work in the woodlot. (New England Farmer,
Montpelier, Vt., March 3, 1906, v. 85, No. 9: 6.)

Akerman, Alfred. Farm forestry. 22 p. Athens. Ga., 1909. (Georgia
Forest Association. Publication.)

Ames, G. W. Practical forestry for farmers. (Society for Protection of
New Hampshire Forests. 7th annual report, 1909, p. 42–6.)

Atkeson, T. C. The farmer’s woodlot. (West Virginia State Board of
Agriculture Report, 1908, p. 97–103.)

Ayres, P. W. The care of the woodlot. (Society for the protection of
New Hampshire Forests. Fourth annual report, 1905–6, p. 50–1.)

Baker, H. P. The farm woodlot in Pennsylvania. (Forest Leaves,
Philadelphia, Pa., Oct. 1908, v. 11: 163–7.)

Baker, J. Fred. The Michigan woodlot. 14 p., illustrated. East Lansing,
Mich., 1912. (Michigan Agricultural Experiment Station. Circular 17.)

Balderson, R. W. The farm woodlot. (Forest Leaves, Philadelphia, Pa.,
April 1905, v. 10: 25.)

Besley, F. W. Woodlot forestry for Maryland farmers. 7 p. Baltimore,
Md. (Maryland State Board of Forestry leaflet No. 5.)

Bogue, E. E. The farm woodlot. (Garfield, C. W. The Michigan forestry
commission and its work, 1905, p. 10–14.)

Bogue, E. E. Woodlot thinning, illustrated. (Forestry and Irrigation,
Aug. 1906, v. 12: 385–8.)

Bradfield, W. Standing timber in woodlots. (National Conservation
Commission. Report, 1909, p. 181–7.)

Bryner, H. E. The improvement of farm woodlots. (Forest Leaves,
Philadelphia, Pa., June 1910, v. 12, No. 9: 133–5.)

Campbell, M. E. The farm woodlot. (Michigan Forestry Commission.
Report, 1905–6, p. 87–90.)

The care of the woodlot. (School World, Farmington, Me., Sept. 1908, p.
21–4.)

The care of the farmers’ woodlot. (Michigan State Board of Agriculture.
Farmers’ Institutes, 1903–4, p. 80–6.)

Clark, Judson F. Defects in the woodlot and how they may be remedied.
(Ontario Agricultural Experiment Union. Twenty-sixth annual report,
1904, p. 63–8.)

Clark, J. F. The farmers’ woodlot, illustrated. (Ontario Forestry
Bureau. Annual report, 1904, p. 51–8.)

Clark, J. F. The propagation of trees by farmers. (Ontario Bureau of
Forestry. Annual report, 1904, p. 334–50.)

Clark, J. F. Woodlot forestry. (Michigan Forestry Commission. Report,
1903–4, p. 47–56.)

Coulter, Stanley. Suggestions for the improvement of Indiana woodlots,
illustrated. (Indiana State Board of Forestry. Twelfth annual report,
1912, p. 85–106.)

Coulter, Stanley. Woodlot conditions and possibilities. (Indiana State
Board of Forestry. Ninth and tenth annual report, 1909: 37–46; 1910:
126–35.)

Davis, C. A. Woodlot studies. 16 p. Ann Arbor, Mich., 1906.

Defebaugh, J. E. Relation of the lumber tariff to the value of farmers’
woodlots. (American Lumberman, Chicago, Feb. 27, 1909, No. 1762: 39–40.)

Every farmer his own forester. (Craftsman, June 1912, v. 22: 348–50.)

Farm forestry. (Forest Fish and Game, N. Y., June 1909, v. 3, No. 1:
1–22.)

Farmer and the forest. (Independent, N. Y., July 16, 1908, v. 65:
165–7.)

Faville, E. E., and Reeves, E. The farmer and the woodlot. (Iowa Park
and Forestry Association. Proceedings, 1904, p. 25–30.)

Ferguson, J. A. The importance of the farm woodlot. (Pennsylvania State
College, May 1911, v. 4, No. 1: 18–21.)

Ferguson, Meade. The forest and the farmer. (Southern Planter, Richmond,
March 1913, v. 74: 315–21.)

Fernow, B. E. Farm woodlot, illustrated. (Bailey, L. H. Cyclopedia of
American Agriculture, 1907, v. 2: 313–23.)

Fisher, R. T. Forestry for Southern New England woodlots. (Forestry and
Irrigation, Washington, D. C., March 1903, v. 9, No. 3: 120–1.)

Foster, J. H. Improving the farm woodlot. 1 p. Durham, N. H., 1912.
(New Hampshire Agricultural Experiment Station. Press bulletin 11.)

Foster, J. H. Suggestions for cutting waste pine lots. 1 p. Durham, N.
H. (New Hampshire Agricultural Experiment Station. Press bulletin 22.)

Fyles, Thos. W. The farmer’s woodlot. (Ontario Entomological Society.
Thirty-ninth annual report, 1908, p. 138–45.)

Gaskill, Alfred. Let’s not overlook the woodlots. (Forestry Quarterly,
Washington, D. C., March 1913, v. 11: 58–61.)

Gifford, John. The forest in relation to the farm, illustrated. (New
Jersey State Board of Agriculture, twenty-third annual report, 1895, p.
170–178.)

Gifford, John. Forestry for the farm. (Connecticut Board of Agriculture.
Thirty-sixth annual report, 1902, p. 85–95.)

Goetz, C. H. Need of farm woodlots in the Central States. (Forest
Leaves, April 1911, v. 13, No. 2: 21–3.)

Goetz, C. H. Practical work on the woodlot. (Forest Leaves,
Philadelphia, Pa., Feb. 1912, v. 13: 107–8.)

Graves, Henry Solon and Fisher, R. T. The woodlot. 89 p. pl. Washington,
D. C., 1903. (United States Agricultural Department of Forest Service.
Bulletin 42.)

Haines, A. S. A study of the chestnut woodlot. (9 Forest Leaves,
Philadelphia, Pa., Aug. 1901, v. 8, No. 10: 150–1.)

Hawes, A. F. The farmers’ woodlot. (Vermont State Forester. Annual
report, first, 1908–9, p. 166–72.)

Hazard, James O. An example of woodlot forestry. 23 p. pl. Trenton, N.
J., 1912.

House, H. D. Improvement of the woodlot. 14 p., illustrated. Columbia,
S. C., 1907. (South Carolina Agricultural Experiment Station. Bulletin
129.)

Hutt, W. N. Management of the farmers’ woodlot, illustrated. (Cornell
Countryman, 1907, v. 4, No. 5: 128–34.)

The importance of the farm woodlot. (Pennsylvania State Farmer,
Pennsylvania State College, May 1910, v. 333, No. 4: 82–85.)

Jackson, E. R. Forestry and the farmer. (University of Virginia. Alumni
Bulletin. Aug. 1911, ser. 3, v. 4, No. 4: 417–25.)

Kellogg, R. S. Farm forestry in Michigan, illustrated. (Michigan State
Board of Agriculture of Michigan Farmers’ Institutes, 1907–8, p. 61–70.)

Knechtel, A. Making a woodlot from seed. 7 p. Albany, N. Y., 1907.

Meller, C. L. The prairie farmer’s tree problem, illustrated. (Country
Gentleman, Dec. 14, 1912, v. 77, No. 50: 3–32.)

Miller, F. G. The farm woodlot in Michigan. (Forestry and Irrigation,
Washington, D. C., April 1903, v. 9, No. 4: 187–9.)

Mulford, Walter. The improvement of the woodlot. 24 p., illustrated.
Ithaca, N. Y., 1912. (Cornell Reading Courses, v. 1, No. 12; Farm
Forestry Series, No. 1.)

Payne, W. F. Value to a farm of a woodlot, illustrated. (Canadian
Forestry Journal, Ottawa, March, April 1912, v. 8: 51–53.)

Price, O. W. First principles of woodlot management, illustrated.
(Farming, Toronto, Oct. 1906, v. 2: 93–4.)

Records, P. C. The value of a woodlot. (Northwoods, St. Paul, April
1913, v. 2: 7–14.)

Record, Samuel James. What is the woodlot worth? illustrated. (Country
Gentleman, Philadelphia, Pa., Sept. 7, 1912, p. 5–8.)

Reynolds, L. C. Protect the farm woodlot. (New York Tribune Farmer,
July 16, 1908, p. 9.)

Schwartz, G. F. Productive possibilities, common deficiencies and how
to improve the woodlot, illustrated. (In United States Department of
Agriculture, Forest Service. Bulletin 44, p. 21–7.)


                   *       *       *       *       *


 Transcriber’s Notes:

 ――Text in bold is enclosed by equals signs (=bold=).

 ――Punctuation and spelling inaccuracies were silently corrected.

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.

 ――Variations in hyphenation and compound words have been preserved.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FARM AND THE WOODLOT ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
